## CHAPTER X Spinoza

Spinoza ( 1634-77) is the noblest and most lovable of the great philosophers. Intellectually, some others have surpassed him, but ethically he is supreme. As a natural consequence, he was considered, during his lifetime and for a century after his death, a man of appalling wickedness. He was born a Jew, but the Jews excommunicated[^excommunicate: 파문하다] him. Christians abhorred him equally; although his whole philosophy is dominated by the idea of God, the orthodox accused him of atheism. Leibniz, who owed much to him, concealed his debt, and carefully abstained from saying a word in his praise; he even went so far as to lie about the extent of his personal acquaintance with the heretic[^heretic: 이단자] Jew.

The life of Spinoza was very simple. His family had come to Holland from Spain, or perhaps Portugal, to escape the Inquisition. He himself was educated in Jewish learning, but found it impossible to remain orthodox. He was offered 1000 florins[^formerly the basic unit of money in the Netherlands; equal to 100 cents] a year to conceal his doubts; when he refused, an attempt was made to assassinate him; when this failed, he was cursed with all the curses in Deuteronomy[^신명기에 나오는 저주 28:15-68] and with the curse that Elisha[^열왕기하에서 엘리샤를 놀리는 어린아이들을 곰이 나타나 죽였다는 일화 2:23-24] pronounced on the children who, in consequence, were torn to pieces by the she-bears. But no she-bears attacked Spinoza. He lived quietly, first at Amsterdam and then at the Hague, making his living by polishing lenses. His wants were few and simple, and he showed throughout his life a rare indifference to money. The few who knew him loved him, even if they disapproved of his principles. The Dutch government, with its usual liberalism, tolerated his opinions on theological matters, though at one time he was in bad odour[^odour: 악취, 평판] politically because he sided with[^side with: -의 편을 들다] the De Witts against the House of Orange. At the early age of forty-three he died of phthisis[^phthisis: 페결핵].

His chief work, the Ethics, was published posthumously[^posthumously: 사후에]. Before considering it, a few words must be said about two of his other books,
